---
path: "/blog/crimes-of-grindelwald"
date: "2018-11-18T12:30:30.000Z"
title: "Individual and the State in 'Crimes of Grindelwald'"
slug: "/blog/crimes-of-grindelwald"
image: "https://cdn3.movieweb.com/i/article/9MKqGCsR7ju6nMhFUniLAqVUNsOuoU/798:50/Fantastic-Beasts-The-Crimes-Of-Grindelwald-Movie-Review.jpg"
---

I recently saw the film "Fantastic Beasts, the Crimes of Grindelwald" while here in China. I initially was a bit reluctant to see it, as I had come across a couple of negative reviews. To be fair, these were from some pretty intense Harry Potter fans, so I thought that people were just being pedantic. After seeing the film though, while perhaps it's not the best executed, it was much more appealing to me than it's predecessor (which to be fair, I had fogotten all about at this point).

I'm not a massive Harry Potter fan, and although I've read the entire series so I'm not completely ignorant of the world. It hasn't been a series that has stuck with me with the same sort of nostaligia that others have. In my optionon, there's nothing terribly compelling about it that would stick with me in comparison to some other series that I enjoy. I saw Fantastic Beasts when it came out in 2016; I thought that the visual effects were pretty great and it had some cute animals but overall still felt that nothing about it I felt grabbed me.

However in the Crimes of Grindelwald, the politics that starts to take a larger role in the movie shown a light on some of the themes that I had missed in the last film. For those who haven't seen the movie, the plot is centered around stopping the wizard Grindelward, a wizard supremacist who is keen on starting a magic revolution and installing a regime to govern over the muggle world. It delivers a message on how fascism manifests itself modern day political systems in a way that isn't entirely propagandistic, but seeks to showcase how existing ruling institutions that grow overly authoritarian and   surpress the autonomy individual can leed to even worse reactionary politics. We find our main character, Newt Scamander (played by Eddie Redmayne) to be caught between two political sides, in turn alienating himself from the wizard society he lives in.

People are also quick to criticize that this movie has very little to do with the main character of Newt, which I agree is true but it is missing the main point of the two films up to date. The sequel continues to build off on Newt's tension with living in a society which pressures him to conform and surpress his individuality for the sake of the magical state (aka the Ministry of Magic). In the first movie, we see that while Newt is employed by the ministry of magic as a 'magizoologist', he is constantly at the mercy of the ministry regarding not only his career but also his autonomy as a wizard to pursue his passions. In two instances, he is harassed initially by Tina, who is a careerist attempting to further herself in the ministry's hierarchy and making up for the disgraces in her past by arresting Newt when he arrives in New York (this is only stopped because of a suitcase switch between him and Jacob the baker). The second is by the ministry themselves, who in their paranioa surrounding the rise of Grindelwald assume that any suspicious (aka non-institutional) behaviour is criminal and must be punished to instill order. The film denounces suppression of the gifts and talents of people throughout, as another example there is a  parasite called the Obscurus that kills magical gifted children if they do not act on their magical gifts. It's very clear the message, a suppresion of being true to who you are is the death of the self. In that way, Newt Scamander is truly heroic; taking it one step further he is extremely capable of accepting the true nature of all magical beings that he comes in contact with.

In "Crimes", we explore this initial premise set out by the previous movie, and we get an understanding of it's perversions. What happens when the individual pursues their own ideas and express their truth upon the world? What if they don't have the same intentions as someone like Newt? What happens to the individuals who don't wish to conform to fascism from either side? Grindelwald's appeal stems from the Ministries desire to completely control the wizarding populace and limit their abilities to live their lives in a way that's meaningful. This is shown as a necessity, seeing as the extremes of the wizarding world are shown to be dangerous not only to the wizarding society, but to the muggle society that cannot comprehend such phenomenas in the first place. And there is truth to it, there is a necessity for the wizarding world to stay in hiding to make sure that it's populace remains safe. We see by the end of the film that while he's uncomfortable between both forces, he is eventually forced to side with the lesser of two evils as Grindelwald either coopts or destroys his friends in the conclusion of the movie. I'm curious to see where the next movies in the series go towards, and how Rowling will conlude these ideas that she's built on.



